---
title: i18n
slug: /guides/i18n
---

We built this application with internationalization in mind ([I don't need i18n](#i-dont-need-i18n)).

## Default locale

Both the `webapp` and `api` services read the `DEFAULT_LOCALE` environment variable.

Its value comes from the root *.env* file.

If you update this value, you will have to restart these services (locally by doing `make down up`).

:::note

📣 Don't forget to update the file *.env.dist* if this change is definitive.

:::

## API

For the API, i18n has three goals:

1. Translate the validation error messages.
2. Translate the emails.
3. Translate the spreadsheets.

The [symfony/translation](https://symfony.com/doc/current/translation.html) package helps us for that task.

:::note

📣 It requires the PHP extension `intl`, already configured in the `api` service.

:::

### Basic usage

Symfony provides a `TranslatorInterface` you can inject in your class, i.e.:

```php
# A class.
private TranslatorInterface $translator;

public function __construct(
    TranslatorInterface $translator
) {
    $this->translator = $translator;
}
```

You can then use it as below:

```php
$translatedSubject = $this->translator
    ->trans(
        'translation_key',
        [],
        'the_domain', // More on that later.
        'the_locale'
    );
```

:::note

📣 Most of the time, you don't have to use the `TranslatorInterface` as either Symfony or the parent class call it for you.

:::

### Translations folder

Folder *src/api/translations* contains one YAML file per locale and domain.

A domain is a sort of scope. For instance, *src/api/translations/emails.en.yaml* and *src/api/translations/emails.fr.yaml* 
are both for the `email` domain (used for translating emails!).

Each of these files contains translation keys and the associated texts.

For instance:

```yaml title="src/api/translations/foo.en.yaml"
foo:
  baz: "Hello"
```

:::note

📣 All files from the same domain should have the same organization (same translations keys, identical sorting, etc.).

:::

### Validation error messages

Let's say you have a class with the following validation annotations:

```php title="src/api/src/Domain/Model/User.php"
/**
 * @Field
 * @Assert\NotBlank(message="not_blank")
 * @Assert\Length(max=255, maxMessage="max_length_255")
 */
public function getFirstName(): string
{
    return parent::getFirstName();
}
```

The `message` property of each `Assert` annotation is a translation key from the `validators` domain:

```yaml title="src/api/translations/validators.en.yaml"
not_blank: "This value should not be blank."
max_length_255: "This value is too long. It should have 255 characters or less."
```

```yaml title="src/api/translations/validators.fr.yaml"
not_blank: "Cette valeur ne doit pas être vide."
max_length_255: "Cette valeur est trop longue. Elle doit avoir 255 caractères ou moins."
```

The web application implements a mechanism for setting the correct locale to translate these validation error
messages (see [interactions between the web application and the API chapter](#interactions-between-the-web-application-and-the-api)).

### Emails

Emails translation uses the `emails` domain. The corresponding YAML files are:

* *src/api/translations/emails.en.yaml*
* *src/api/translations/emails.fr.yaml*

Let's take a look at the `CreateEmail` use case:

```php title="src/api/src/UseCase/CreateEmail.php"
protected function create(User $user, string $subjectId, string $template, array $context): TemplatedEmail
```

The method `create` takes, among other arguments, a *src/api/src/Domain/Model/User.php* and the translation key 
of the email's subject. The `User` has a `locale` property used for translating both the email's subject and its content.

See the [emails](emails) documentation for more details on how to extend this use case.

The Twig templates of your emails should look like this:

```twig title="src/api/templates/emails/foo.html.twig"
{% extends 'emails/email.html.twig' %}
{% trans_default_domain domain %}

{% block body %}
    {% apply inky_to_html|inline_css(source('@css/foundation-emails.css'), source('@css/emails.css')) %}
        <h1>{% trans into locale %}translation_key{% endtrans %}</h1>
   {% endapply %}
{% endblock %}
```

The `CreateEmail` use case will provide both `domain` and `locale` values.

### Spreadsheets

Spreadsheets translation uses the `spreadsheets` domain. The corresponding YAML files are:
                                                         
* *src/api/translations/spreadsheets.en.yaml*
* *src/api/translations/spreadsheets.fr.yaml*

As you might want to translate the headers and cell values of your XLSX exports, the boilerplate provides examples
on how of do so.

Let's take a look at the `CreateXLSXExport` use case:

```php title="src/api/src/UseCase/CreateXLSXExport.php"
public function create(string $locale, array $headerIds, array $values): Xlsx
```

The method `create` takes, among other arguments, a locale. It will use it to translates the spreadsheet's headers
accordingly.

For values, you should translate them directly in your UseCase before calling the `create` method.

## Web application

For the web application, i18n has two goals:

1. Translate the user interface.
2. Tell the API which locale the user has selected (for validations errors, etc.).

We use the [nuxt/i18n](https://i18n.nuxtjs.org/) module, and we configured it in 
the *src/webapp/nuxt.config.js* file.

### Basic usage

In your `<script>` blocks:

```js
this.$t('a_translation_key')
```

In your `<template>` blocks:

```vue
<template>
  <button>
    {{ $t('a_translation_key') }}
  </button>
</template>
```

### Locales folder

Folder *src/webapp/locales* contains one JavaScript file per locale.

Each of these files exports an object with translation keys and the associated texts.

For instance:

```js title="src/webapp/en.js"
export default {
  foo: {
    baz: 'Hello',
  },
}
```

:::note

📣 All files should have the same organization (same translations keys, identical sorting, etc.).

:::

It would be best to organize the translations keys according to the file's path where you've put them.

If the file content is lengthy, append the most relevant component from the `<template>` block.

For instance:

```vue title="src/webapp/pages/login.vue"
<template>
  <form>
    <button>
      {{ $t('pages.login.form.submit') }}
    </button>
  </form>
</template>
```

```js title="src/webapp/locales/en.js"
export default {
  pages: {
    login: {
      form: {
        submit: 'Send',
      },
    },
  },
}
```

```js title="src/webapp/locales/fr.js"
export default {
  pages: {
    login: {
      form: {
        submit: 'Envoyer',
      },
    },
  },
}
```

If you are using the same translations in different files, you may put them under the `common` key:

```js title="src/webapp/locales/en.js"
export default {
  common: {
    first_name: 'First name',
    last_name: 'Last name',
    email: 'Email',
    locale: 'Locale',
    role: 'Role',
  },
}
```

### Browser language detection

The first time the user lands on your application's root pages (`/x`, but not `/x/y`), it automatically detects the 
browser language and sets the cookie `i18n_redirected` with the corresponding locale. 

If your application does not support the browser language, it uses the default locale instead.

Next time the user lands on your application, it will use cookie `i18n_redirected`'s value to translate the 
user interface to the correct locale automatically (and redirect the user to the right path - see below).

### Routing

The router prefixes all routes with the locale. For instance, the login page is available on the paths `/en/login` and
`/fr/login`.

Wherever you need to push a route in your router, use the global method `localePath({ name: 'route_name' })`.

For instance, in your `<script>` blocks:

```js
this.$router.push(this.localePath({ name: 'index' }))
```

Or in your `<template>` blocks:

```vue
<template>
  <b-link :to="localePath({ name: 'reset-password', query: { email: form.email } })">
    {{ $t('pages.login.form.forgot_password_link') }}
  </b-link>
</template>
```

If you don't know the name of your route, take a look at the router file Nuxt.js generates:

```js title="src/webapp/.nuxt/router.js"
{
  path: "/fr/update-password/:id?/:token",
  component: _8474331c,
  name: "update-password-id-token___fr"
}
```

The name of the route here is `update-password-id-token`.

:::note

📣 If a route has parameters, you have to give them to the `localePath` method.

:::

### Update the locale

The file *src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue* provides an example of how to update the locale:

```vue title="src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue"
<template>
 <b-nav-item-dropdown right>
  <template #button-content>
    {{ currentLocale }}
  </template>
  <b-dropdown-item
    v-for="locale in availableLocales"
    :key="locale.code"
    :active="locale.code === currentLocale"
    :to="switchLocalePath(locale.code)"
  >
    {{ locale.code }}
  </b-dropdown-item>
 </b-nav-item-dropdown>
</template>

<script>
export default {
  computed: {
    availableLocales() {
      return this.$i18n.locales.filter((i) => i.code !== this.$i18n.locale)
    },
    currentLocale() {
      return this.$i18n.locale
    },
  },
}
</script>
```

Here calling `switchLocalePath` will update the current locale in the `i18n` store (from nuxt-i18n), 
plus the value of the cookie `i18_redirected`. It will also redirect the user to the correct route.

Our custom plugin *src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js* hooks itself on these events for:

1. Updating the HTTP header `Accept-Language` for next GraphQL requests (more on that in the next chapter).
2. Updating the user's locale in the database if authenticated.

:::note

📣 We configured nuxt-i18n to lazy load the locales files, meaning it will only load the current locale file 
instead of all locales files. You may have to refresh a page in development to see changes made in the corresponding
locale file.

:::

## Interactions between the web application and the API

There are three ways for communicating the user locale from the web application to the API:

1. Requests with `Accept-Language` HTTP header for validation error messages.
2. Query parameters when you cannot set the previous HTTP header (links, for instance).
3. Update the user's locale via a GraphQL request if authenticated.
4. Update the user's locale on login if the web application locale is not the same as the locale from the API

### HTTP header

Use case: translating the validation error messages.

Each time the user changes its locale on the web application, the *src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js* plugin will 
update the HTTP header `Accept-Language` for the next GraphQL requests with the new value.

The *src/api/src/Infrastructure/EventSubscriber/LocaleSubscriber.php* class
from the API reads the value of this HTTP header to set the locale on its side.

### Query parameters

In some use cases, you cannot set an HTTP header. For instance, when the user clicks on a link, you will have to use
query parameters:

```
http://foo.bar/?locale=fr
```

In the boilerplate, we use this solution for XLSX exports.

### Update the authenticated user's locale

As explained before, whenever an authenticated user changes the locale on the web application, we run the 
`updateLocale` GraphQL mutation. 

In the API, the `UpdateLocale` use case updates the `locale` property of this user.

:::note

📣 This property helps to know in which locale the API has to translate emails for this user.

:::

We also call the `updateLocale` GraphQL mutation on page *src/webapp/pages/login.vue*
in the specific scenario where the web application locale is not the same as the user's locale from the API.

## I don't need i18n

No problem! Remove the web application's locale selection (*src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue*)
and set the `DEFAULT_LOCALE` environment variable with your unique locale (see [default locale](#default-locale) chapter).